RFC: Batch query on source. (#20)
risingwavelabs/rfcs: rfcs/batch_query_on_source.md

---
feature: batch_query_on_source
authors:
  - "Renjie Liu"
start_date: "2022/11/10"
---

# Batch Query on Source

## Summary

> Introduce execute batch query on sources like kafka/s3.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Support executing the batch queries on sources like Kafka/S3.
```

## Motivation

We have already supported ingesting data from sources like kafka/s3, but user may want to query directly from them.

### Non Goal

* We assume that data stored in source are json or protobuf, which has no index/statistics associated with it, so we will not introduce any optimization on it.

## Design

Essentially, after user creates a source, we want to allow user to execute following sql to query data directly:

```sql
CREATE SOURCE IF NOT EXISTS source_abc (
   column1 varchar,
   column2 integer,
)
WITH (
   connector='kafka',
   topic='demo_topic',
   properties.bootstrap.server='172.10.1.1:9090,172.10.1.2:9090',
   scan.startup.mode='latest',
   scan.startup.timestamp_millis='140000000',
   properties.group.id='demo_consumer_name'
)
ROW FORMAT JSON;

select * from source_abc limit 10;
```

In general, we need to add source plan node for batch plan and source scan executor for batch query engine. The parallelism of source scan executor is determined by the number of source splits, which can be fetched from sources.

### Extra columns

> By default, we allow user to scan data using earliest or latest offset. This default option works well in streaming, but maybe not suitable for batch execution. For example, user may just want to scan kafka data in latest 10 minutes, or lastest 10000 messages. Or when user has already partitioned data, they may want to query only some partition. To fufill these requirements, we can expose message meta as extra columns in schema. Let's use kafka as an example, we can attach following extra columns to each source from kafka:

Reviewer: Flink allows users to extract such fields by the `METADATA FROM` clause.

Author: Yes, they are similar, both are virtual columns.

| Column name                | Type      | Comment                                                                                   |
|----------------------------|-----------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

> | _rw_kafka_partition        | int       | Kafka partition this message from.                                                        |

Reviewer 2: What if the source is not Kafka?

Author: I'm using kafka as an example here. Other source may use similar strategy to help prunning data to scan.

Reviewer 2: Ok so for pulsar will there be an `_rw_pulsar_timestamp` or should we rename this var to some more general?

Author: Good question, I think both are ok to me. What's important for user is to have clear document for meaning and use example.

| _rw_kafka_partition_offset | bigint    | Kafka offset in partition. 0 means starts from earliest, and -1 means starts from latest. |

> | _rw_kafka_timestamp        | timestamp | Message timestamp                                                                         |

Reviewer 3: This is better modeled as `timestamp with time zone` rather than `timestamp`.
* Internally, `timestamp with time zone` stores the (micro)seconds since epoch in UTC while `timestamp` stores a year-month-day-hour-minute-second tuple
* On usage, `timestamp with time zone` allows the user to write `_rw_kafka_timestamp > '2022-11-10 10:00:00Z'` or `_rw_kafka_timestamp > '2022-11-10 02:00:00-08:00'`, but `timestamp` requires a PST user to write `_rw_kafka_timestamp > '2022-11-10 10:00:00'` when the desktop clock is saying `2022-11-10 02:00:00`.

Author: Good point!

With these extra columns, we can implement several optimizations:

> 1. To query messages from some time, we can write `_rw_kafka_timestamp > '2022-11-10 10:00:00'`. We can use kafka's seek time offset api to determine smallest offset later than `'2022-11-10 10:00:00'`.

Reviewer 4: So if user doesn't specify the condition in the `where` condition, all available events will be selected regardless of `scan.startup.mode`, right?

Reviewer 4: Alternatively I think we can also ignore `scan.startup.mode` and always read from earlest, unless specified by `where _rw_kafka_timestamp > ...`

Author: Anyway, I think a better solution is to separate connector/source definition to make things clear and explicit.

Reviewer 4: Yes. In theory the clearest way is to differentiate `create external table` and `create source`, while the problem is that we don't want users to define it twice.

> 2. To limit scan by range of offsets, we can use `_rw_kafka_partition_offset > 1000`.  If the offset range is postive number, it's counted from earliest. We can use `_rw_kafka_partition_offset > -1000` to express latest 1000 message in each partition.

Reviewer 5: I doubt whether kafka provides indices by a negative number.

Author: We will first only implement timestamp based offsets.

3. To limit partition to scan, we can use `_rw_kafka_partition = 0` to scan data from partition 0 only.

> Above queries use kafka as an example, we can have similar stategies for other sources(pulsar, kinesis, etc).

Reviewer 4: By the way, even if these columns are used for filtering majorly, we also need to implement on the output side to make it compliant with SQL's semantics i.e. `select _rw_kafka_timestamp, _rw_kafka_partition_offset, _rw_kafka_partition, * from my_source` should give correct results.
